---
title: DNS Resolver Information Self-publication
abbrev: Resolver Information
docname: draft-ietf-dnsop-resolver-information

stand_alone: true

ipr: trust200902
kw: Internet-Draft
cat: std

pi:
  toc: yes
  tocdepth: 4
  sortrefs: yes
  symrefs: yes

author:
 -
   ins: P. Sood
   name: Puneet Sood
   org: Google
   email: puneets@google.com
 -
   ins: R. Arends
   name: Roy Arends
   org: ICANN
   email: roy.arends@icann.org
 -
   ins: P. Hoffman
   name: Paul Hoffman
   org: ICANN
   email: paul.hoffman@icann.org

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC7493:
  RFC8174:
  RFC8259:
  RFC8499:

informative:
  RFC7858:
  RFC8126:
  RFC8484:
  RFC8615:
  I-D.ietf-acme-ip:

--- abstract

<!--

Notes for future versions:

- Say that, if a web client knows the domain name of the resolver,
include that in the SNI of the TLS connection, if possible.

-->

This document describes methods for DNS resolvers to self-publish information
about themselves, such as whether they perform DNSSEC validation or are
available over transports other than what is defined in RFC 1035.
The information is returned as a JSON object.
The names in this object are defined in an IANA registry that allows
for light-weight registration.
Applications and operating systems can use the methods defined here
to get the information from resolvers in order to make choices about
how to send future queries to those resolvers.

--- middle

# Introduction

Historically, DNS stub resolvers typically communicated with the recursive
resolvers in their configuration without needing to know anything about the
features of the recursive resolvers. More recently, recursive resolvers have
different features that may cause stub resolvers to make choices about which
configured resolver from its configuration to use, and also how to
communicate with the recursive resolver (such as over different transports).
Thus stub resolvers need a way to get information from recursive resolvers
about features that might affect the communication.

This document specifies methods for stub resolvers to ask recursive resolvers for such
information. In short, a new RRtype
is defined for stub resolvers to query using the DNS, and a new well-known URI
is defined for stub resolvers to query using HTTP over TLS.

The response from either method is the same: a JSON object. The JSON object
MUST use the I-JSON message format defined in {{RFC7493}}.
Note that {{RFC7493}} was based on RFC 7159, but RFC 7159 was replaced by {{RFC8259}}.
Requiring the use of I-JSON instead of more general JSON format greatly increases
the likelihood of interoperability.

The information that a resolver might want to give to a recursive resolver
is not defined in this document; instead other documents will follow that will
specify that information and the format that it comes in.

It is important to note that the protocol defined here is only for
recursive resolvers, not for authoritative servers.
Authoritative servers MUST NOT answer queries that are defined in this protocol.
(It is likely that a later protocol will allow authoritative servers
to give information in a method similar to the one described in this document.)

## Definitions

In the rest of this document, the term "resolver" without qualification
means "recursive resolver" as defined in {{RFC8499}}.
Also, the term "stub" is used to mean "stub resolver".

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY",
and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
BCP 14 {{RFC2119}} {{RFC8174}} when, and only when, they
appear in all capitals, as shown here.


# Retrieving Resolver Information by DNS {#by-dns}

A stub that wants to use the DNS to get information about a resolver can use the DNS query
defined here.
The query a stub resolver uses is &lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa/IN/RESINFO.
The RRtype "RESINFO" is defined in this document, and the IANA assignment
is given in {{iana-resinfo}}.
The contents of the Rdata in the response to this query is defined in
{{json-contents}}.
If the resolver understands the RESINFO RRtype, the RRset in the Answer
section MUST have exactly one record.

In this section, "&lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa" is the domain name associated
with the reverse lookup of an IP address of the resolver (resolvers can have multiple addresses).
For example, if the resolver is at 192.0.2.1, the query would be
1.2.0.192.in-addr.arpa/IN/RESINFO.

A resolver that receives a query with the RRtype of RESINFO with
a QNAME of &lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa
acts as if it is delegated, and responds with its own RESINFO data in the
Answer section.
The resolver can generate this reply with special code to capture queries
for these types of addresses;
if the resolver can be configured to also be authoritative for some zones,
it can use that configuration to actually be
authoritative for the addresses on which it responds.

A stub that knows a specific type of information it wants MAY ask for that
information by prepending a label with the name of the information in its
query.
For example, if the stub knows that it wants information whose name
is "temp-field2", it would send the query temp-field2.&lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa/IN/RESINFO.
As described in {{json-contents}}, the JSON object in the response is likely to
have name/value pairs in addition to the one requested.

Any query for the RESINFO RRtype that is not in &lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa/IN or a
subdomain of &lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa/IN is meaningless and MUST result in a
NODATA or NXDOMAIN response.
Resolvers would not need any special code to meet this requirement; they
only need code to handle the RESINFO RRtype that is not in
&lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa/IN or a subdomain of &lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa/IN .


# Retrieving Resolver Information by Well-Known URI {#by-uri}

A stub that wants to use HTTPS to get information about a resolver can use the
well-known URI defined here.
Because this uses HTTPS, the stub has the possibility of authenticating the
TLS connection.
If the connection cannot be authenticated (such as if the stub only knows
the IP address of the resolver and the resolver's certificate does not have
the IP address, or the correct IP address), the stub MAY still use the
results with the same lack of assuredness as it would have with using a DNS
request described in {{by-dns}}.

The stub MUST use the HTTP GET method.
The URI used to get the resolver information is one of:

~~~
https://IPADDRESSOFRESOLVER/.well-known/resolver-info/

https://DOMAINNAMEOFRESOLVER/.well-known/resolver-info/
~~~

This uses the ".well-known" URI mechanism defined in {{RFC8615}}.
The contents of the response to this query is defined in
{{json-contents}}.

A resolver that uses this protocol to publish its information SHOULD, if
possible, have a TLS certificate whose subject identifiers are any IP
address that the resolver is available on, as well as any domain names that
the resolver operator uses for the resolver.
At the time that this document is published, getting IP addresses in TLS
certificates is possible, but there are only a few widely-trusted CAs that
issue such certificates.
{{I-D.ietf-acme-ip}} describes a new protocol that may cause IP address
certificates to become more common.

In the future, DHCP and/or DCHPv6 and/or RA may have options that allow
the configuration to contain the domain name of a resolver.
If so, this can be used for matching the domain name in the TLS
certificate.


# Contents of the Returned I-JSON Object {#json-contents}

The JSON object returned by a DNS query or an HTTPS query MUST contain at least one name/value pair:
"inventory", described later in this section. The returned object MAY
contain any other name/value pairs.

The requirement for the inclusion of the "inventory" name/value pair
is so that systems retrieving the information over DNS can create specific
queries.
Using specific queries can reduce the number of round trips in the case
where the answers to queries become large.
The "inventory" name/value pair MUST be included in the response even
if the query was for a single name.

If the request was over DNS using a subdomain under &lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa, the
resolver SHOULD return an object that contains a name/value pair with that
name if the resolver has that information.
If the resolver does not have information for that name, it MUST NOT return
the name in the object. 

If the request was over HTTPS, the resolver SHOULD return an object with
all known name/value pairs for which it has information. 

All names in the returned object MUST
either be defined in the IANA registry or, if for local use only, begin with the substring "temp-“.
The IANA registry ({{iana-res-info}}) will never register names that begin with "temp-“.

All names MUST consist only of lower-case ASCII characters, digits, and
hyphens (that is, Unicode characters U+0061 through 007A, U+0030 through
U+0039, and U+002D), and MUST be 63 characters or shorter.
As defined in {{iana-res-info}}, the IANA registry will not register
names that begin with "temp-", so these names can be used freely
by any implementer.

Note that the message returned by the resolver MUST be in I-JSON format.
I-JSON requires that the message MUST be encoded in UTF8.

This document only defines one element that can returned: "inventory".
All other elements will be defined in other documents.

## The "inventory" name

The "inventory" name lists all of the types of information for which the resolver has
data. The value is an array of strings.

## Example

The I-JSON object that a resolver returns might look like the following:

~~~
{
   "temp-field2": 42,
   "temp-field1": [ "There is", "no \u000B!" ],
   "inventory": [ "inventory", "temp-field1", "temp-field2" ]
}
~~~

As specified in {{RFC7493}}, the I-JSON object is encoded as UTF8. This example
has no un-escaped non-ASCII characters only because they are not currently allowed in
Internet Drafts. For example, the exclamation mark in the second name/value pair could instead be
the double exclamation mark character, U+203C.

{{RFC7493}} explicitly allows the returned objects to be in any order.

# IANA Considerations

## RESINFO RRtype {#iana-resinfo}

This document defines a new DNS RR type, RESINFO, whose value TBD will be
allocated by IANA from the "Resource Record (RR) TYPEs"
sub-registry of the "Domain Name System (DNS) Parameters" registry:

Type: RESINFO

Value: TBD

Meaning: Information self-published by a resolver as an I-JSON (RFC 7493) object

Reference: This document

## Registry for DNS Resolver Information {#iana-res-info}

IANA will create a new registry titled "DNS Resolver Information"
that will contain definitions of the names that can be used with
the protocols defined in this document.
The registration procedure is by Expert Review and Specification Required,
as defined in {{RFC8126}}.

The specification that is required for registration can be either
an Internet-Draft or an RFC.
The reviewer for this registry is instructed to generally be liberal
in what they accept into the registry:
as long as the specification that comes with the registration request
is reasonably understandable, the registration should be accepted.

The registry has the following fields for each element:

Name: The name to be used in the JSON object. This name MUST NOT
begin with "temp-".
This name MUST conform to the definition of "string" in I-JSON {{RFC7493}} message format.

Value type: The type of data to be used in the JSON object.

Specification: The name of the specification for the registered element.

## resolver-info Well-known URI

Before this draft is complete, mail will be sent to wellknown-uri-review@ietf.org
in order to be registered in the "Well-Known URIs" registry at IANA. The mail
will contain the following:

URI suffix:  resolver-info

Change controller:  IETF

Specification document(s):  This document

Status:  permanent


# Security Considerations

Unless a DNS request for &lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa/IN/RESINFO, or a subdomain, as described in
{{by-dns}} is sent over DNS-over-TLS (DoT) {{RFC7858}} or DNS-over-HTTPS
(DoH) {{RFC8484}},
or unless the &lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa zone is signed with DNSSEC,
the response is susceptible to forgery.
Stubs and resolvers SHOULD use normal DNS methods for avoiding forgery
such as query ID randomization and source port randomization.
A stub resolver will know if it is using DoT or DoH, and if it is using DoT
it will know if the communication is authenticated (DoH is always
authenticated).

An application that is using an operating system API to send queries for
&lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa/IN/RESINFO or a subdomain will only know if query went
over authenticated DoT or DoH if the API supports returning that
authentication information.
Currently, no common APIs support that type of response.

--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

The idea of various types of servers publishing information about themselves
has been around for decades. However this idea has not been used in the DNS. This document aims to fix this omission.

Erik Kline suggested using "&lt;reverse-ip&gt;.{in-addr,ip6}.arpa" as the domain name
to allow for the possibility of DNSSEC-signed responses.
